
=== Output of 'epidewarp.fsl --help' ===


USAGE: epidewarp.fsl

Inputs

  --mag volid     : B0 magnitude volume
  --dph volid     : B0 phase difference volume
  --ph volid      : B0 phase volume
  --complex r1 i1 r2 i2 : B0 map in complex values

  --exf volid     : example func volume (or use epi)
  --epi volid     : epi volume to unwarp

  --tediff tediff : difference in B0 field map TEs
  --esp esp       : EPI echo spacing
  --perev         : assume reversed phase encode direction
  
  --sigma sigmamm : 2D spatial gaussing smoothing stddev (def 2mm)
  --vsm-fwhm fwhm : allows vsm to be extended outside of the mask
  
Outputs
  --vsm volid   : voxel shift map (required)
  --vsmmag volid: voxel shift map in mag space
  --exfdw volid : dewarped example func volume
  --epidw volid : dewarped epi volume
  
  --nomagexfreg : assume mag and exf are in register
  --head        : mask to head instead of brain
  --tmpdir dir  : save intermediate results here
  --log logfile : use logfile instead of default
  --nocleanup   : do not delete tmpdir
  --cleanup     : force deletion of tmpdir
  --debug
  --help

epidewarp.fsl 7.4.1

NOTE! As of Feb 26, 2010, this program requires FreeSurfer to run.

Help Outline:
  SUMMARY
  ALGORITHM OVERVIEW
  ARGUMENTS
  SUGGESTED FIELD MAP PARAMETERS
  NOTES
  SEE ALSO
  BUGS
  BUG REPORTING
  AUTHORS
  REFERENCES AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

SUMMARY

Front end for FSLs PRELUDE and FUGUE programs to correct for B0
distortion in functional EPI scans. The programs use a B0 fieldmap.
This is assumed to be two conventional GREs collected at two different
echo times (TEs). The field map should be acquired with the same slice
prescription, slice thickness, slice skip, voxel resolution, and
field-of-view as the EPI. This should work with NIFTI, NIFTI_GZ, and
ANALYZE formats, but NIFTI are NIFTI_GZ *HIGHLY* recommended.
Converting between ANALYZE and NIFTI in FSL can produce
unpredictable results.

For the stock Siemens field map, two field maps are required, one to
get the phase and another to get the magnitude (this will change with
new version of the Siemens scanner software). The volume that is
stored as the phase is actually the phase difference and is scaled
between 0 to 4095 for -pi to pi. The magnitude volumes for both TEs
are saved, but only one is needed.

All volumes are assumed to be in analyze 4D format. All volumes should
be referred to as volid.ext (where ext is either nii, nii.gz, or
img). If the EPI or EXF volume has a .mat file, this will be
propagated to the outputs.

ALGORITHM OVERVIEW

1.  Create a brain mask from the mag volume (BET)
2.  Create a head mask by dilating the brain mask 3 times
3.  Rescale the phase image to -pi to pi
4.  Unwrap the phase (PRELUDE)
5.  Create and smooth the voxel shift map (VSM) (FUGUE)
6.  Remove in-brain mean from VSM
7.  Forward warp the mag volume (FUGUE)
8.  Register the forward warped mag with the example func (FLIRT)
9.  Resample the VSM into EPI space (FLIRT)
10. Dewarp the EPI and/or Example Func (FUGUE).

ARGUMENTS

--mag magvolid

Magnitude volume from the B0 fieldmap. If more than one frame is
present, then only the first is used. Not with --complex.

--dph phasediffvolid

Phase difference volume (Echo2-Echo1). These are assumed to be scaled
between 0 to 4095 for -pi to pi. Eg, dph.ext, where ext is either nii,
nii.gz, or img. Not with --complex or with --ph.

--ph phasevolid

Phase volume from the B0 fieldmap (if the phases from Echo1, Echo2 are
available instead of their difference). These are assumed to be scaled
between 0 to 4095 for -pi to pi. Eg, ph.ext, where ext is either nii,
nii.gz, or img. Not with --complex or with --dph.

--complex real1 imag1 real2 imag2

Specify B0 field map with real and imaginary components instead of
mag and phase. 

--exf examplevolid

Single volume to use as the example func. If not supplied, then the
middle time point from the EPIs will be used. This volume must have
enough anatomy to be able to register with the mag. It should also
have the exact same geometry as any EPIs. This option allows the user
to specify a functional for the example and then a statistical map as
the EPI.

--epi epivolid

EPI volume to dewarp. This could be a time series or a single frame
statistical map. If it is a stat map, then supply an example func
(--exf) to assure that there is some anatomy for registration to
the mag volume.

--tediff tediff

Difference in the echo times of the B0 field map in ms. This number is
set when acquiring the field map. This is often set to 2.46 ms at 3T,
which is the amount of time it takes for the fat and water to
rephase. The rephase time scales with field strength.

--esp echospacing

Time (ms) between the start of the readout of two successive lines in
k-space during the EPI acquisition.  This can also be thought of as
the time between rows.  This parameter is not available in the Siemens
DICOM header. However, it can be obtained from the console.  Open the
protocol for the functional scan (NOT the field map). Go to the
Sequence tab. Go to Part 1. The Echo Spacing is displayed on the
bottom right. It will also be on the protocol print out (select the
functional protocol in the Exam Explorer, right click, and select
Print...).  If one saves the raw kspace data, then the echo spacing
can be found next to the m_lEchoSpacing tag in the meas.asc and is in
usec. Note that the echo spacing is not the same as the time to read
out a line of k-space and it cannot be computed from the bandwidth
because neither of these methods takes into account the dead time
between lines when no data are being read out.

--perev

Assume reversed phase encode direction. Same as giving esp or tediff a
negative sign. Implemented by multiplying esp by -1.

--sigma sigmamm

2D Smoothing VSM with gaussian with stddev of sigmamm (in mm). Default
is 2 mm. This tends to have minimal impact but can clean things up
around the edge of the brain.

--vsm vsmvolid

Voxel shift map. This is a volume the same size as the EPI. The value
at each voxel indicates the amount the voxel has shifted in the phase
encode direction due to B0 distortion. This argument is required.

--exfdw exfdwvolid

This is exf volume or the middle time point from the EPI time series
(the "example functional") with B0 distortion removed. Mainly good for
checking how good the dewarping is without having to dewarp the entire
time series.

--epidw epidwvolid

This is the EPI time series with B0 distortion removed.

--tmpdir tmpdir

Location to put the directory for storing temporary files. By default,
this will be in a directory called tmp-epidewarp.fsl under the
directory to hold the VSM volume. When --tmpdir is used or --nocleanup
is specified, then this directory will not be deleted. Otherwise or
with --cleanup it will automatically be deleted.

--nocleanup

Do not delete the tmp dir. --tmpdir automatically implies --nocleanup.

--cleanup

Forces deleting of the tmp dir regardless of whether --tmpdir or
--nocleanup have been specified.

--debug

Prints copious amounts to the screen.

SUGGESTED FIELD MAP PARAMETERS

These field map parameters are being used by the Biomedical
Informatics Research Network (www.nbirn.net). For Siemens, we
recommend using the stock sequence called gre_field_mapping.  The
DeltaTE might differ slightly on individual systems from the values
listed below depending upon the exact field strength (eg, 2.89T
instead of exactly 3T).

TR = 500ms (1000ms with phased-array)
TE1: Minimum possible
TE2 = TE1 + DeltaTE

DeltaTE = 4.92ms for 1.5T
Flip Angle: 65 for 1.5T
DeltaTE = 2.46ms for 3T
Flip Angle: 55 for 3T
DeltaTE = 1.845ms for 4T
Flip Angle: 55 for 4T

FatSat: Off
Bandwidth: Maximum
Slice Prescription, FOV, Thickness, Skip, Pixel Resolution, Matrix Size:
same as functional

NOTES

The output will not necessarily be registered with the mag volume. To
compare the mag with the dewarped output, first register the mag
to the dewarped output.

SEE ALSO

http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fugue
http://www.ami.hut.fi/instructions/epi_distortion.html

BUGS

None (yet).

BUG REPORTING

This software is offered as is with no promise or implication that it
will be supported. However, if you have a problem or question, you can
send it to analysis-bugs@nmr.mgh.harvard.edu and we will get to as we
can. If you want your question to have a chance of being answered,
include all of the following: your command-line, text printed out by
the program, log file, and a description of the problem. Of course, if
you have made it this far into the documentation, you probably alrealy
know these things.

AUTHORS

Doug Greve, Dave Tuch, Tom Liu, and Bryon Mueller with generous help
from the FSL crew (www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl) and the Biomedical
Informatics Research Network (www.nbirn.net).

REFERENCES AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS:

For prelude:

M. Jenkinson. A Fast, Automated, N-Dimensional Phase Unwrapping
Algorithm Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 49(1), 193-197, 2003.

For fugue:

M. Jenkinson. Improved Unwarping of EPI Volumes using Regularised B0
Maps International Conference on Human Brain Mapping - HBM2001.

Jezzard, Peter, and Balaban, Robert S. Correction for Geometric
Distortion in Echo Planar Images from B0 Field Variations. Mag Res
Med, 1995, 34:65-73.

For epidewarp.fsl we ask that the following be placed in the
acknowledgement section of you papers:

  "Some of the scripts involved in this work were developed by
   FBIRN (www.nbirn.net)."

=== Output of 'epidewarp.fsl -help' ===

ERROR: Flag -help unrecognized.
-help

=== Output of 'epidewarp.fsl' (no arguments) ===


USAGE: epidewarp.fsl

Inputs

  --mag volid     : B0 magnitude volume
  --dph volid     : B0 phase difference volume
  --ph volid      : B0 phase volume
  --complex r1 i1 r2 i2 : B0 map in complex values

  --exf volid     : example func volume (or use epi)
  --epi volid     : epi volume to unwarp

  --tediff tediff : difference in B0 field map TEs
  --esp esp       : EPI echo spacing
  --perev         : assume reversed phase encode direction
  
  --sigma sigmamm : 2D spatial gaussing smoothing stddev (def 2mm)
  --vsm-fwhm fwhm : allows vsm to be extended outside of the mask
  
Outputs
  --vsm volid   : voxel shift map (required)
  --vsmmag volid: voxel shift map in mag space
  --exfdw volid : dewarped example func volume
  --epidw volid : dewarped epi volume
  
  --nomagexfreg : assume mag and exf are in register
  --head        : mask to head instead of brain
  --tmpdir dir  : save intermediate results here
  --log logfile : use logfile instead of default
  --nocleanup   : do not delete tmpdir
  --cleanup     : force deletion of tmpdir
  --debug
  --help

